All right, so now let's talk about
spawning actors and to do this, we
are going to go to our original scratchpad
and take a look at our alarm again.
Oops So,
one thing that comes up is how exactly do
you isolate behavior, in a component.
And one of the ways that you could do that
is by using what's called an actor model.
And x state exhibits the actor
model in its design.
So it exhibits both state machines,
state charts, and the actor model too.
So to describe what the actor model is,
I'm just going to draw
a diagram over here.
An actor is a thing.
Like an entity, and so
we could call this an actor.
I know that might not
sound very helpful but
an actor is something that basically
follows a set of rules and
with those Those simple set of rules,
you could design entire systems.
If you're used to back in programming,
then microservices very much
exhibit this type of architecture.
But an actor is something where
You can send it in advance,
so I'm just going to put advance here.
An actor is also something that can
send in advance to another actor.
So if I copy paste this, And
of course an actor can send an event
back to that actor if it knows about it.
The key word here being that the actor has
to know About the other actor as well.
For example, if you want to call
someone you need to know their number.
If you want to send them an email,
you need to know their email address.
You can't really just guess it.
You have to physically have it in
order to communicate with them.
An actor can also spawn child actors.
And it could spawn basically
a dynamic amounts of them.
And when it spawns it, it already
has a reference to that actor so
it could send messages to that actor.
And that actor can also send messages
back to the parents actor as well.
And so, if you're coming from Redux or
if you want to look at things in term
Reacts, a local state versus context,
then you could envision these actors
as being local private states.
So as individual stores that could
communicate with other stores.
Instead of they're just being one
global state or one global store.
You have these individual stores
where the, the both the behavior and
the state inside each one of these
actors is completely private.
So the only way for
an actor to read something from
another actor is it has to ask it.
And then the actor has to
send it back via an event.
The asking is optional.
The actor could just you know,
send it back and
if this seems a little bit strange to you.
One really good analogy
is making a web request.
When you request something to a server,
you are sending a request that might have
headers might have query parameters.
Basically that's an event to the server
and the server responds to the client.
With in-events of its own, you know,
so you a client's can't, for example,
directly read a database, it has to ask
the server, hey, what are all of the,
you know all the things all the rows
from this database based on my query,
and the server could choose
whether to respond or not.
So that's the actor model.
In a nutshell.
And I highly suggest reading
an article called actor
model in ten minutes,
which describes the actor model,
a little bit more in depth but
is still pretty clear to understand.
So, just as an example,
let's take this alarm machine,
We have this behavior which can be
isolated, but this is an individual alarm.
If we have more than one alarm,
let's, let's do the obvious thing.
First.
Let's separate this into its own
component.
So I'm going to have const alarm equals
and then we're going to be returning this.
But we also want the,
all of these values here too.
So we have the alarm machine, and
then we could have the alarm over here.
And now we could have multiple alarms.
And of course,
each one of these components is going
to have its own isolated behavior.
So if you squint a little bit, this sort
of feels like the actor model already
accepts, this really has no way of
communicating to its parents and
it's sort of an abstract ad hoc structure.
So let's make a const alarms machine.
And this is going to
be creating a machine.
And so, in our context, which you'll
remember is the extended state or
the potentially dynamic states.
We want to represent each
one of our alarm actors.
Inside here, so, we're gonna say,
alarms and we'll just have
that be an empty rate for now.
We could have an initial state of active,
doesn't really matter.
States active and then On.
We're gonna have an event
called add alarm.
And over here, this is where
we're going to, what's called,
spawn, a new alarm actor.
And added to this context over here.
So, we're going to do this in actions,
assign.
And we're going to be assigning to alarms.
So Context.
Remember, you get both context and events.
But in this case, just for this example,
we're going to be using context.
So our spawned alarm,
which I'm just going to call alarm.
There's a function that's exported
from x state called spawn.
And so inside of that function,
let's see where we are, right over here.
Right over here,
we could spawn an alarm machine.
So, basically this is saying we
are spawning an actor which is like this,
this entity this special object with
the behaviour of alarm machine,
and then we could return context
alarms can cat that alarm.
So let's take a look at what
is actually returned here.
Const send equals use machine and
we're going to use that alarms machine.
[COUGH] We're also gonna log the state.
Okay, so we have a few things here,
we also, let's go ahead and
add a button, so
that we could actually add, an alarm.
So, Okay.
Cool, so when we click Add alarm and
we look in the state,
we'll see that the context
now has one new alarm.
Now this alarm is going to be an object
right now it's an interpreter but
don't worry about that too much.
Just realize that this is an actor
that has a send method and
we could send events to it.
So it follows the actor model and
because this is an interpreted machine.
We could use service and
use the alarm directly in use service.
So let's expand this alarm here and
make it take an alarm prop.
So instead of use machine,
we want to use service and
we're gonna pass in that alarm.
I like prefixing my my services
with Ref or actors in general.
Because in general,
it's a it's a reference to an actor,
so it's an actor ref.
All right, so over here we have alarm,
alarm ref equals,
and of course we need to
get those from the states.
So, we're going to do
state.context.alarms.map.
Where am I?
And we are going to return alarm where
the alarm breath, is that alarm?
And we have to give it a key as well
because that's what we are expects.
So okay, so right now there are no alarms.
But if I click here,
now we have a new alarm.
If I click here, more alarms, and
each one of these again has
its own individual behavior.
So this might look sort of
like we're doing a lot here.
Were spawning actors and mapping
through them and getting the reference.
And using use service to reference
each one of these alarms.
But one of the key things
here is each one of these
alarms can actually communicate
back with the parents.
So what the parent could do is also,
send an event to all of
those alarms as well.
So let's just demonstrate sending
an event from the child to the parent.
So, the alarm, let's say that we
have pending and active and okay.
So once we get to the active states so
on entry.
We're going to send parent and
I'm just going to send it an active event.
And so this is basically the child
telling the parent, hey, guess what,
I'm active now.
Now, of course the parent doesn't
really handle that event.
So we'll just do it here, active,
Actions and
let's just do a plain action over here.
So context event, we are going to
cancel that log received event.
All right, so let's test this out.
Let's create a couple alarms and when we
click one It's going to tell the parents,
hey, I'm active and the parents, right now
it doesn't do anything with that event.
It just receives that event and, yeah, so
that is spawning actors in a nutshell.
You could also spawn just like in
invocations, you could spawn promises,
you could spawn observables
you could spawn call backs.
And of course you could
spawn machines as well.
>> And David,
as you start to nest these machines and
you get to more than a couple of layers.
Then if you wanted if you needed one
of the kind of descendant machines
to talk to like a top level.
You just have to do send parents and
parent all the way up or
if there's some other mechanism for
the broadcasting or?
>> All right, so the question was,
if you needed some deep
down like descendants child to
talk to some higher ancestor.
Basically let's actually go to
the drawing board Strikescale.com.
So let's say that we have a system
of actors, which is what.
Well what is called when you have so
many actors will make
three levels over here suddenly copy and
paste this and put that there.
And let's say that we want this
actor to somehow communicate,
let's see, let's make this even deeper.
So, we have this actor over here and
this actor is basically the roots.
Which communicates with this actor and
also communicates with this actor.
Alright, so I guess what you're trying
to say is what if this actor all
the way down here wants to somehow
communicate with this one.
So I'm going to, I'll make this just so
that you could see.
So we want to somehow
communicate with that actor.
Naturally actors
are a hierarchical structure.
So doing something like this doesn't
really happen nor should it happen.
Because you don't want this
spaghetti architecture where any
arbitrary actor could communicate
with any other arbitrary actor.
This is a modeling problem and
there's a few solutions depending
on your use case for this.
One of those is using
what's called an event bus.
Now you can simulate an events
bus by just having an actor that
acts like as a router.
It basically receives a message
from an actor that says, hey,
I wanna send this to this actor.
Or I want to post this on this topic,
if you're coming from sort of a Kafka or
event grid background, and
other actors could listen to it too.
But in general,
an actor can only communicate with
other actors it has reference to.
However, in the actor model,
you could send so,
actually, let's make this green.
You could definitely send a reference
to an actor through an actor.
So let's say that that
this is our special actor
that we want the other
actor to notify as well.
So we have this in Well,
we'll call this a reference to that actor.
Basically, when this actor creates
this actor, it could say, by the way,
here's a here's an actor
you should know about.
And so we could give that reference
to that actor to this actor as well.
And so that actor,
since it has a reference to that,
it could send an event to that directly.
And yeah, so you could do that you could
also do in the event Bus sort of way.
Where this basically is the Event Bus and
this might send it to somewhere else
depending on what it has reference to.
It's sort of an advanced
modeling concepts.
Just being able to cross those
hierarchical boundaries and
it doesn't really It doesn't really
manifest itself too often in normal apps,
in really complex apps it
could definitely do that.
So in the documentation,
I'll definitely add how you
could simulate in the Event Bus.
You could also go to
spectrum.chat/statecharts.
And there actually is a topic
about using things such as
an Event Bus within X state.
So, Yeah, should be here somewhere but,
Yeah, that's definitely a big topic and
I could spend a couple of
hours talking about just that, but
it depends on how you model your system.
And the beauty about this,
is that the answer for
this would be the exact same answer for,
let's say,
how you would do it in sort of
a micro service environment.
It's an architecture question basically,
so, Any other questions?
>> Yeah, this is kind of an aside.
Do you have any materials or references or
things like that that you think
are particularly good for
getting better at doing this kind of
modeling or this kind of architecture?
>> So the question was,
what reference material is there for
just learning how to architect actor
model based applications better.
And honestly,
there's a lot of books on it.
One of my favorite ones
that I read was something
applied reactive modeling with Akka, or
something like that,
reactive modeling Akka.
Akka, by the way, is a very popular actor
model of framework for Java and Scala.
So obviously not for
Java scripts, they have a .net
version Whatever the book is called.
But yeah, honestly, I would highly
recommend reading books on Akka
just because even if you don't do
Akka there is a lot of patterns and
best practices like this book shows you
for doing the actor model in practice.
And the more you learn
about the actor model,
the more you see just how many places it
actually applies to in the front end.
And I think I would say most of actor
model usage is in the back end.
So, yeah, it's definitely a useful way
of thinking for the front end as well.
So any of the Akka books really.
>> Are there any open source or other
larger scale projects that you can point
to that we could look at for
a reference on best practices and things?
Cuz most of all the exercises and
tutorials are kind of these
smallish kind of like toy projects.
And so, yeah, that's my question.
>> Yeah, so the question was
about are there any exercises or
examples you could look for
in terms of architecture?
And so again what I really
like looking at is just if you
search like Akka patterns then
there's a lot of examples.
And also a few books like good actor
design, applied Akka patterns.
And also, let's do akka examples.
I think there's actually
a repo with a lot of example
projects that you could look at.
Now, Akka model is a bit
of a learning curve.
Definitely not as much as state charts.
But you could generally
get the gist of what's
happening even if you don't understand, or
you're not familiar too much
with the language involved.
Just by looking at what is being spawned,
what events are being sent to other
events, and things like that.
Another good way to practice,
personally, instead of just reading or
looking at examples, is by practicing
what's called making sequence diagrams.
So, [COUGH] if you're not familiar with
sequence diagrams, sequence diagrams
are a way of representing how different
actors communicate with each other.
So for example over here,
this is not a very good sequence diagram,
I'll show you something else.
Here we go, here's a sequence diagram.
So you can see over here that we have
these actors at the top such as Game Deck,
Player 1, Player 2, and
they're sending events to each other.
So learning how a sequence diagram works,
and just the notation for it.
That's going to make you a lot better at
designing actor model based applications
as well.
Just practicing by doing that.
So you don't even need to
do the actor model, or
code the actor model in your code.
It's just a very good practice for
when you're talking about
business logic just draw it out.
And draw it out with your
state machines as well.
So, that's another point too,
a state machine describes
the behavior of one actor.
An actor model system describes the
behavior of how actors talk to each other.
So that's the difference right there.